Added Dynamic P2P Blogpost (#46)
input-output-hk/engineering: blog/2023-04-12-dynamic-p2p.md

---
slug: 2023-04-012-p2p
title: Unveiling Cardano's Dynamic P2P Release: A Leap Forward in Decentralization
authors: [bolt12]
tags: [networking, p2p]
custom_edit_url: null
---

## Introduction

As the Cardano ecosystem continues to grow and evolve, we at IOHK are committed to
constantly refining our networking infrastructure. Cardano's new dynamic Peer-to-Peer
(P2P) release marks a major milestone in its journey towards creating a fully

> decentralized and secure blockchain platform. The previous announcement revealed that
> Dynamic peer-to-peer (P2P) networking is coming to Cardano with node v.1.35.6 release. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decentralized and secure blockchain platform. 
Dynamic peer-to-peer (P2P) networking was released with node v.1.35.6. In
```

in mind:

1. Detect and disconnect adversarial peers.
2. Control resource consumption.

Assuming no peer can be trusted led to three essential design decisions:

1. Forward only validated information.
2. Strictly control the potential for resource consumption.
3. Refrain from forwarding information about important nodes.

Nodes are responsible for the validity of forwarded messages, ensuring they are both
well-formed syntactically and semantically valid. If a peer fails to meet these
requirements, it is considered adversarial and disconnected.

Protocols are designed in a demand-driven style, allowing each node to control data
arrival rates, maximum concurrency, and outstanding data amounts. This approach prevents
adversarial peers from mounting resource consumption attacks and helps manage timeliness
by constraining queuing delays.

### Development Approach

Cardano's P2P implementation is founded on the use of Haskell, a functional programming
language renowned for its correctness, safety, and maintainability. Haskell's powerful
type system helps identify potential issues during development, leading to more robust and

> reliable code. In addition, we developed and employ io-sim, a time-based discrete event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reliable code. In addition, we developed and employ [io-sim], a time-based discrete event
```

And add at the bottom:
```
[io-sim]: https://github.com/input-output-hk/io-sim
```

simulation library that provides precise control over entropy and timing during
simulations. This tool also faithfully simulates Haskell's runtime system, including

> TVars, MVars, STM, and more. This level of control allows for reproducibility, regression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`TVar`s, `MVar`s, `STM`, and more. This level of control allows for reproducibility, regression
```

> testing, and examination of worst-case scenarios. By combining Haskell and io-sim, we can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
testing, and examination of worst-case scenarios. By combining Haskell and [io-sim], we can
```

rigorously test the exact same code in the P2P production system under a wide range of
conditions, ensuring it is well-prepared to handle real-world challenges.

Our team takes pride in the extensive testing conducted and the rare, elusive corner cases
uncovered as a result of our meticulous testing approach. By simulating years' worth of
time, we can identify and address even the most unlikely bugs. To put things in
perspective, let's assume each test runs between 1 to 5 hours of simulated time per test,

> per input, per PR, per OS. With over 100 simulation tests in the ouroboros-network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
per input, per PR, per OS. With over 100 simulation tests in the [ouroboros-network]
```
and add at the bottom:
```
[ouroboros-network]: https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network
```

repository, each test will assess 100 randomly generated inputs per OS. Considering an
average of 3 PRs per week, we run approximately 225,000 hours of total simulated time
weekly—that's over 25 years! Our rigorous approach allows us to find and fix highly
improbable bugs, run tests for decades of simulated time to ensure stability, and

> confidently deliver a top-notch product.

Reviewer: Ultimately, the quality of the test also depends on quality of the generators.  We should make a remark about it.

## Essential Elements of Cardano's Dynamic P2P Networking Implementation

In this section, we will take a closer look at the intricate components that form the
backbone of Cardano's dynamic P2P networking implementation. By delving deeper into the
design, we aim to provide a comprehensive understanding of how these elements interact and
collaborate to overcome challenges and ensure an optimized networking experience in the
Cardano ecosystem.

> ### Peer Selection Governor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Outbound Governor
```

Or maybe `Outbound Governor (also known as Peer Selection Governor)`.

conditions and events.

Something very important is to update the local peer reputation information when peer
connections fails. The existing design classifies the exceptions that cause connections to
fail into three classes:

- internal node exceptions e.g. local disk corruption;
- network failures e.g. dropped TCP connections; and
- adversarial behaviour, e.g. a protocol violation.

In the case of adversarial behaviour the peer can immediately be demoted out of the hot,
warm and cold sets. We choose not to maintain negative peer information for extended
periods of time; to bound resources and due to the simplicity of Sybil attacks.

Lastly, there's the outer control loop that's responsible for churning between cold and
warm peers, serving multiple purposes such as discovering the network distance for more
peers and allowing for further optimization or adaptation to changing conditions. Churn
between warm and hot peers enables potentially better warm peers to replace existing hot
peers. Maintaining diversity in hop distances aids in recovery from network events that
may disrupt established short paths, such as internet routing changes, partial loss of

> connectivity, or accidental formation of cliques.

Reviewer: I would like to see a description of the churn, including

* the leader board which decides which connections to demote
* the promotion policy (random selection)

This will be interesting for SPOs, but not only.

I think this deserves it's own section, it's the core logic which determines the topology.

The outer control loop also addresses the issue of eclipse, whether malicious or
accidental, and adjusts the behavior of the inner control loop over longer time scales. By
managing peer connections based on these factors, the network can maintain its resilience

> and efficiency in the face of various challenges and changing conditions.

Reviewer: I would leave the problem of eclipse avoidance for a separate blog post.  We should just signal it that we solved the problem and we will communicate it at a later stage.

---
slug: 2023-04-012-p2p

> title: Unveiling Cardano's Dynamic P2P Release: A Leap Forward in Decentralization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Unveiling Cardano's Dynamic P2P Release: A Leap Forward in Decentralization"
```

Reviewer: otherwise the site will not build.

> authors: [bolt12]

Reviewer: You need to add yourself to `blog/authors.yml`

tags: [networking, p2p]
custom_edit_url: null
---

## Introduction

As the Cardano ecosystem continues to grow and evolve, we at IOHK are committed to

> constantly refining and optimising our networking infrastructure. Cardano's new high

Reviewer 2: highly performant

performant, dynamic Peer-to-Peer (P2P) release marks a major milestone in its journey
towards creating a fully decentralized and secure blockchain platform. Dynamic
peer-to-peer (P2P) networking was released with node v.1.35.6 release.

> As a stochastic runtime system, Cardano's performance and security are inherently

Reviewer 2: stochastic runtime system -> real-time stochastic system

intertwined. Our team, remains committed in identifying the perfect equilibrium between
various factors, such as topological and topographic considerations that can improve
timeliness, and connectivity.

In this blog post, we'll explore the engineering journey behind the
development of Cardano's Dynamic P2P design. We'll cover the core design principles, the
challenges we faced along the way, and the solutions we devised to create a robust and
scalable networking system.

> 

Reviewer 2: Suggest moving section "Fundamental requirements of Cardano data diffusion" (line 297) to this point.

   into smaller, more manageable components, we can apply property-based testing more
   effectively to each module, ensuring that the behavior of each part is well-defined and
   adheres to the expected properties. Of course, picking Functional Programming with
   Haskell as our primary programming language played a significant role in achieving this
   level of modularity and extensibility.

2. Scalability: As the network grows, so does the need for a system that can handle a
   larger number of nodes and transactions, while ensuring it still respects Ouroboros
   timing constraints. For our P2P design vision, we took scalability into account from
   the outset, incorporating strategies such as intelligent peer selection.

3. Security and Resilience: In a decentralized network, resilience and security are of
   paramount importance. We focused on building a system that could withstand both
   internal and external disruptions, by employing techniques such as robust error
   handling mechanisms, designed for (but not only) resilience to abuse, meaning that
   users should not be able to attack the system using an asymmetric denial of service

>    attack that will deplete network resources from other users. With P2P, one is able to

Reviewer 2: "With P2P, one is able to prioritise their connection to locally configured peers, this ensures one always maintain connection to trusted peers " ->
With P2P, each node is able to prioritise its connection to locally configured peers, which ensures its always maintains connection to trusted peers

The figure above compares the outcomes from the two approaches described earlier. The
simulation involved each node maintaining a fixed number of 6 "close" neighbors (based on
Round Trip Time or RTT), and 4 random nodes. These links were kept static throughout the
entire experiment. In the "2 groups (<=100ms and >100ms)" protocol, each node maintains a
fixed number of close links and remote links. However, "close" here signifies that the RTT
to that neighbor is less or equal to 100 ms, while "remote" implies that the RTT is more
than 100 ms. Nodes start with all random links and periodically calibrate. During this
calibration, they retain up to a fixed number of neighbors that have an RTT of less than
100 ms, and they replace some of the remaining neighbors with newly picked random nodes.

The graph lets us infer certain metrics such as how many churn cycles one needs to get
optimal global dissemination and illustrates that when using local information to
calibrate its connections to other peers, one can gradually approach an optimal result. As
shown, periodic recalibrations lead to a progressive improvement in the overall
dissemination performance.

> ![Close random policy](/img/close-random-graph.pdf)

Reviewer: This image doesn't load, we probably need to change it into a `png`.

The figure above further confirms the effectiveness of our approach to the challenge of
efficient diffusion. In this experiment all nodes use exactly the same Close-Random policy
as detailed for the previous graph. All nodes start as uninformed nodes, i.e. they have
not received a given block yet, and they become informed at some point over the course of
the experiment. The dotted line represents the theoretical optimal solution, which is
contingent on all informed nodes having complete knowledge about which peers are the most
beneficial for them, making such connections.

> The plot shows how fast the population of all-uninformed nodes turns into an all-informed
> set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plot shows how quickly a block disseminates through the network eventually arriving to all nodes.
```

I would also move this sentence just below the graph.

warm peers. This approach allows for fixed relationships between nodes managed by a single
organization, such as a stake pool with multiple relays. It also facilitates private
peering arrangements between stake pool operators and other probable deployment scenarios.

In instances of adversarial behavior, a peer can be immediately demoted from the hot,
warm, and cold sets. We opt not to maintain negative peer information for extended periods
to limit resource consumption and due to the simplicity of Sybil attacks.

A crucial component is the Peer Churn Governor (PCG), which tackles issues related to
partition and eclipse, whether malicious or accidental. It adjusts the peer selection
governor's behavior over extended time scales, performing the following actions:

- It modifies the target churn frequencies of the peer selection governor for
  promotion/demotion between the cold/warm/hot states.

- It triggers partial or total re-bootstrapping under specific circumstances.

During node syncing, the PCG ensures that the node utilizes no more than two active nodes.
Once the node has synced, it churns approximately 20% (or at least one) of the peers every

> churn interval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
churn interval (which is set to 1 hour).
```

Reviewer: I would include here description of our scoring functions.

chain, and ultimately strengthen any potential adversaries.

The immediate question is: is this timeliness constraint hard to meet, or not? We consider
some evidence from Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Cardano:

1. *Bitcoin*: There is some evidence available from Bitcoin's network performance
   regarding block propagation time. Two research papers and corresponding data reveal the
   average time it took for a block to reach 90% of the nodes. There is a significant
   spread in these values, which is not a problem for Bitcoin due to its large inter-block
   interval. However, for Cardano, it is crucial to consistently deliver blocks to the
   next block producer in much less than 5 seconds, minus the time it takes to create another
   block. Failing to achieve this can lead to random forks and increased vulnerability to
   attacks.

   One paper[^1] shows a significant improvement in Bitcoin's block propagation time in 2018.
   However, it is important to note that for Bitcoin, it is sufficient to check just the
   hash of the block before passing it on to peers. However, for Cardano, more extensive
   block validation is necessary before relaying, as not doing so would open up an

>    asymmetric resource DoS attack on the network.

Reviewer: Should we mentioned that this was relaxed due to consenus level pipelining?

Author: This section was removed.
